## Project: Data Modeling with Postgres

This is the first project of Data Engineer Nanodegree in Udacity

### Introduction

A startup called Sparkify wants to analyze the data they've been collecting on songs and user activity on their new music streaming app. The analytics team is particularly interested in understanding what songs users are listening to. Currently, they don't have an easy way to query their data, which resides in a directory of JSON logs on user activity on the app, as well as a directory with JSON metadata on the songs in their app.

They'd like a data engineer to create a Postgres database with tables designed to optimize queries on song play analysis, and bring you on the project. Your role is to create a database schema and ETL pipeline for this analysis. You'll be able to test your database and ETL pipeline by running queries given to you by the analytics team from Sparkify and compare your results with their expected results.


### Project Description

In this project, you'll apply what you've learned on data modeling with Postgres and build an ETL pipeline using Python. To complete the project, you will need to define fact and dimension tables for a star schema for a particular analytic focus, and write an ETL pipeline that transfers data from files in two local directories into these tables in Postgres using Python and SQL.

### Dataset

> **Song Dataset**

> > The first dataset is a subset of real data from the [Million Song Dataset](http://millionsongdataset.com/). Each file is in JSON format and contains metadata about a song and the artist of that song. 



> **Log Dataset**

> > The second dataset consists of log files in JSON format generated by this [event simulator](https://github.com/Interana/eventsim) based on the songs in the dataset above. These simulate activity logs from a music streaming app based on specified configurations.



### Data Model

The data model I have implemented star schema which includes fact table and dimensions tables of fact table.

**Fact Table**

- song_plays
  - It stores the user log data associated with song plays.

**Dimension Table**

- users: 
  - It stores user information in the APP.
- artists:
  - It stores the artist's information of the songs.
- songs: 
  - It stores music information, it includes title, duration, publish year, etc.
- time
  - It stores the timestamps of records in songplays broken down into specific units.

## ETL Pipeline

The ETL jobs is in the `etl.py`, and it can briefly separate into four sections.

1. Connect to the database.

2. Process **song dataset**.

   - Extract song information and  insert into `songs` table

   - Extract artist information and insert into `artists` table

3. Process **log dataset**

   - Convert the format of timestamp and break down into specific units, then insert into `time` table.

   - Extract user information and insert into `artists` table
   - Insert log data into `song_plays` table, and it needs notices that the `song_plays.song_id` and `song_plays.artist_id` need to get from `songs` and `artists` table first.

4. Disconnect the database

### Programming Execution

- If you want to locally execute this project, you need to set up [PostgreSQL](https://www.postgresql.org/docs/9.1/runtime.html) first. Here is an [installation tutorial](https://www.codementor.io/@engineerapart/getting-started-with-postgresql-on-mac-osx-are8jcopb) for Mac users.

- Execute the script to create database and its tables by executing `python3 create_tables.py`
- Execute the script to do ETL pipelines by executing `python3 etl.py`

## Purpose of the Data Model

The purpose of the data model is that we can easily aggregate and analyze for business scenarios. The data model allows use to aggregate songs, artists and users.

> Scenario 1. Which song is the most popular during the specified time range? 

```sql
select song_id, 
			count(song_id) as count_song
from song_plays
where start_time >= time_range1 and start_time <= time_rage2
group by song_id
order by count(song_id) desc;
```

> Scenario 2. Which location has the most active users during the specified time range?

```sql
select location,
		count(distinct user_id) as count_user
from song_plays
where start_time >= time_range1 and start_time <= time_rage2
group by location
order by count(distinct user_id) desc;
```

